# Radical Markets
> *In the present stage of technological and economic development, when cooperation has grown too large to be managed by moral economies, the market is the appropriate computer to achieve the greatest good for the greatest number. If we see it as such, we can fix the bugs in the market's code and enable it to generate more wealth that is distributed more fairly.* - [Radical Markets](http://radicalmarkets.com/) by Eric Posner, E. Glen Weyl

These are my notes from [Radical Markets](http://radicalmarkets.com/) by Eric Posner, E. Glen Weyl; most of them are just direct quotes and I provide page numbers often.

## Property is Monopoly
> *The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood. Indeed the word is ruled by little else. Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influence, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist* - John Maynard Kaynes, 1936

**Harberger Tax**: *If taxes are to be levied...on...the value of...properties...it is important that assessment procedures be adopted which estimate the true economic value...The economist's answer...is simple and essentially full-proof: allow each...owner...to declare the value of his own property, make the declared values...public, and require that an owner sell his property to any bidder...willing to pay...the declared value. This system is simple, self-enforcing, allows no scope for corruption, has negligible cost of administration, and creates incentives, in addition to those already present in the market, for each property to be put to that use in which it has the highest economic productivity.* - Arnold Harberger, 1962

* it penalizes any attempt to exercise monopoly power over an asset
* Full allocative efficiency is achieved: every asset passes to the hands of the person best able to use it and invest in it.

George's proposal failed because of the concern that people would not invest in their property if they must pay confiscatory taxes on the rents it produces (trades allocative efficiency for decreased investment efficiency).

When the tax is reduced incrementally to improve investment efficiency, the loss in allocative efficiency is less than the gain in investment efficiency. The reason is that the most valuable sales are ones where the buyer is willing to pay significantly more than the seller is willing to accept...In fact, it can be shown that the size of the social loss from monopoly power grows quadratically to the extent of this power. Thus, reducing the markup by a third eliminates close to 5/9 of the allocative harm from private ownership. Furthermore, in this example the distortion to investment is eliminated.

It is always optimal to have at least a very small tax. For example, a 1% tax will hardly distort investment at all but can still significantly improve allocative incentives. The owner will self-assess with reasonable accuracy to minimize her tax bill, but she will not be deterred from making valuable investments in the property. It is typically optimal to **set a moderate tax rate, below turnover rate**, that balances these two forces.

We call this the **Common Ownership Self-Assessed Tax (COST**. (PAGE 61)

In the current system of private property, buying assets outright is very expensive and thus often requires large reserves of cash or the capacity to borrow. A COST would mitigate this problem because possessors anticipate the taxes that they will pay in the future, the price they will set on an asset will fall dramatically, as it would be discounted by the amount of future COST payments. (PAGE 68)

Because most of the returns to capital flow to the very wealthy, a broad distinction exists between those who live primarily off the returns to capital and those who live off their labor. A COST would make most of the return to capital flow to the public, making it more equally distributed than wages. The COST would thus end the conflict between capital and labor, making differences in labor income the leading source of inequality. (PAGE 75)

## Radical Democracy
> *First they came for the Socialists, and I did not speak out -- Because I was not a Socialist. Then they came for the Trade Unionists, and I did not speak out -- Because I was not a Trade Unionist. Then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out -- Because I was not a Jew. Then they came for me -- and there was no one left to speak for me* - German Protestant theologian Martin Niemöller

The idea behind an auction, Vickrey realized, *is not* allocating the good to the highest bidder. Instead it is that *each individual must pay an amount equal to the cost that her actions impose on others*. (PAGE 99)

If we care about the overall or aggregate well-being of everyone in the town, then we need a way of determining whether the intense preferences of the minority outweigh the weak preferences of the majority. (PAGE 101)

What's important is not so much the total cost of each number of votes, but that the marginal cost of casting the next vote grows proportionally to the number of votes cast. (PAGE 107)

[Quadratic Voting](./QuadraticVoting.md)(QV)

Rating and social aggregation systems fuel today's digital economy. Reputation systems are the crucial trust mechanisms that allow "sharing economy" services like Airbnb, VRBO, Uber, and Lyft to win consumer acceptance and give providers the confidence to adopt the system...Yet a growing body of evidence suggests these systems are badly broken...almost all reviews cluster towards five stars, and a few at one star, making the resulting feedback biased and noisy. 
> With QV, users could have voice credits that they receive for participation (say a certain number for every stay, ride, or post) that they then could use to evaluate the performance of others on the system. The cost of votes pro and con would grow quadratically and participants could save their credits for future interactions or use saved credits for those about which they feel more strongly at present. Such a system combines the best of both tipping and rating, creating a real cost to expressing enthusiasm, but also discouraging free-riding and allowing other participants to benefit from the feedback. (PAGE 117)

The broader the scope of use of voice credits, the better. (PAGE 123)

**QV** empowers citizens to express their views in a fundamentally richer and deeper way than 1p1v allows. It encourages citizens and politicians not just try to win over poorly informed swing voters or to motivate disaffected members of their own base, but to engage with people who have different views. It would allow citizens to focus their voting on topics of their true passion and knowledge, rather than force them to vote on issues on which they feel ill-informed and thus liable to conform to stereotypes and party identification. Because QV penalizes extreme views by making them costlier to express, it encourages moderation and compromise. By offering broader freedom, subject to a budget constraint, it gives citizens greater responsibility and control over collective decisions. In the same way that participating in public protests often gives citizens a sense of ownership over policy choices, QV would offer citizens the chance to feel their vote had been more fully heard, both helping them win on the issue most important to them and reconciling them to the losses they suffer. (PAGE 124)

## Uniting the World's Workers

In modern developed economies, a family of average income enjoys a standard of living similar to that of the very weakthiest families in poor counties. Theirs was a world in which migration did most people little good; ours is one in which migration can be a primary route to well-being and prosperity for most people in the world. (PAGE 135)

In their famous 1941 treatise, "Protection and Real Wages," Wolfgang Stolpher and Paul Samuelson claimed that while trade between a pair of countries always increases the aggregate wealth of both countries, it can have important redistributive effects. Specifically, trade tends to benefit the factors of production that a nation has in relative abundance and to hurt those it has in relatively scarce supply. Wealthy countries, by definition, have greater relative abundance of capital as compared to labor than do poor countries. It is thus natural that trade and migration should both benefit capitalists in wealthy countries and laborers in poor countries at the expense of laborers in wealthy countries and capitalists in poor countries. (PAGE 143)

Many Europeans are not just abstractly aware of the possibility that migrants strain social services, but also see with their own eyes migrants competing for access to these services. Because of the historical homogeneity of many continental European countries, this competition is visually striking because migrants are easily recognizable by skin color or religious practice. (PAGE 145)

**Visa Between Individuals Program** (VIP) enables any ordinary person to sponsor a migrant worker for an indefinite period rather than a renewable three-year period. This could either bring a rotating cast of temporary guest workers (one at a time) or one permanent migrant over a lifetime. (PAGE 150) For this system to work, the law must make two further adjustments. (PAGE 153)
* First, migrant workers must be permitted to work for below the minimum wage. Under current law, a worker paid the federal minimum wage would receive almost $15,000 in one year. By way of comparison, the average annual income in Nepal is less than $1,000 and typical Nepalese make closer to $500; Haiti has similar living standards. Appplications of the federal minimum wage to migrant workers would block the enormous welfare gains that VIP would otherwise produce. 
* Second, immigration enforcement would need to be strengthened. Enforcement against future illegal immigrants would have to be more stringent to avoid undermining the rights of both the large new class of legal migrants and their hosts. However, enforcement of the VIP system would be easier than the current system because migrants desperate to enter the country can more easily find sponsors and thus avoid the risks of illegal entry.<br>

> Two critiques: (1) wouldn't the first amendment to the law put downward pressure on wages for American workers and make it difficult for them to compete with migrant workers in many cases (2) Applications to this program seem susceptible to discrimination; this idealistic scheme ignores the systemic racism perpetuated by the existing system. If the system is not fair, then illegal immigration shouldn't be enforced as aggressively...

By empowering communities to decide the texture of their cultural life, the VIP would avoid the negative reactions that are possible when people feel rapid changes are being imposed from above. (157)

> Communities are not homogeneous and this sort of program may be perceived as rapid changes imposed from above by some members of a community. Even if this is a relatively small minority, their preferences may be voiced more aggressively and this may cause strife within the community.

We need to acknowledge that we in the United States already have a subordinate class of low-wage workers--they are illegal aliens. Americans have exploited this class for decades, and it has for those decades been tolerated by the US government because of its importance for many industries. By bringing this underground economy into the open, our approach would allow it to be regulated and monitored. It would be put on a more rational basis so that better matches are made between the needs of the US economy and the interests of foreign workers. (PAGE 165)

## Dismembering the Octopus

The basic dilemma was that while the trusts damaged market competition, enabling them to overcharge for their goods and services, they also could spread the fixed costs of production over many more consumers because of their vast scale, resulting in lower prices, and eliminate local monopolies by buying up land and local business monopolies in what economists call "vertical integration." It would thus never have made sense simply to abolish big business. (PAGE 175)

Liquid public ownership also created a paradox identified by Adolf Berle and Gardiner Means in *The Modern Corporation and Private Property*. Corporations enables entrepreneurs to raise vast pools of capital to fund huge projects like railroads and steel mills by attracting millions of shareholders from around the country and world. Those owners enjoyed the rights to the corporation's profits -- either in the form of dividends or the proceeds of liquidation of the corporation after its creditors were paid off. However, they also, at least in principle, were supposed to "control" the corporation by hiring the corporation's directors, ... Yet as Berle and Means pointed out, "ownership" of a corporation is very different from ownership of ordinary property...In the case of a large corporation, millions of owners exist. If you own three shares of Google, you can vote them all you want, but your vote is unlikely to make a difference. (PAGE 177-178)

The separation of ownership and control gives rise to what economists call "agency costs"...The development of stock markets gave investors the power to obtain liquidity, but the price to be paid was loss of control -- agency costs. (PAGE 179)

When combined, BlackRock, Vanguard, and State Street constitute the single largest shareholder of at least 40% of all public companies in the United States and nearly 90% of public companies in the S&P 500. The fraction of US public firms held by institutional investors who simultaneously hold large blocks of other same-industry firms increased from less than 10% in 1980 to about 60% in 2010 and has continued to rise since. Institutional investors constitute the latest iteration of the Red Queen problem in antitrust enforcement. Traditional antitrust enforcement aimed to prevent any single corporation from dominating any entire market. But institutional investors have enabled investors to avoid these rules by knitting together the interests of the biggest firms that dominate any particular market -- and have done so throughout the economy. Indeed, institutional investors behave much as trusts did a century ago, but in subtler and less transparent ways. Yet the fact that these institutions have the potential to eliminate competition not just in one sector but in the whole economy, combined with the very obscurity of their actions, make their control all the more pernicious. (PAGE 184)

The logical end point of institutional investment and diversification is the coordination of all capital to extract maximum wealth from consumers and workers. (PAGE 191)

Our approach can be stated as a simple rule: No investor holding shares of more than a single effective firm in an oligopoly and participating in corporate governance may own more than 1% of the market...Because institutional investors appear to reduce competition among firms they own, they should not be permitted to own firms that are rivals within a single, concentrated industry -- with exceptions where institutional investors are small or passive. (PAGE 192)

If our proposal were put into effect, competition would instead focus on the quality of governance that institutional investors provide, leading to a market where competition between institutional investors would directly help solve the Berle-Means problems by holding institutional investors accountable for governing the companies they invest in to maximize returns. (PAGE 193-194)

The legal prohibition on institutional investing patterns that lead to the monopoly problem we highlight is quite clear. The relevant portion of the law reads:
> No person...shall acquire, directly or indirectly, the whole or any part of the stock or...assets of another person...where...the effect of such acquisitions may be substantially to lessen competition, or to tend to create a monopoly.

A corporation counts as a "person," so a corporation cannot buy the assets or stock of another corporation where the effect is to concentrate the market to a sufficient degree. But the statute includes an exception:
> This section shall not apply to persons purchasing such stock solely for investment and not using the same by voting or otherwise to bring about, or in attempting to bring about, the substantial lessening of competition.

This provision came to be known as the passive investment defense. Thus, a corporation cannot obtain shares when doing so reduces competition; but it may obtain shares for "investment purposes." How are these provisions reconciled? In *United States vs. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.*, the US Supreme Court rules that du Pont's purchase of a substantial stake in General Motors could violate Section 7. "Even when the purchase is solely for investment, the plain language of Section 7 contemplates an action at any time the stock is used to bring about, or in attempting to bring about, a substantial lessening of competition." So, in the end, the only question is whether the acquisition of stock does or does not reduce competition. (PAGE 196-197)

Economist Luigi Zingales makes a forceful case in his 2012 book, *A Capitalism for the People*, that antitrust law should be used to block mergers that result in the acquisition of political influence through the concentration of lobbying capacity in a few firms.

To misquote another Radical, eternal viligance is the price of market competition. (PAGE 204; abolitinist Wendell Phillips)

## Data as Labor

The powerhouses of the digital economy, firms like Facebook, Google, and Microsoft, exploit the lack of public understanding of AI and ML to collect for free the data we all leave behind in our online interactions. This is the source of the record profits that make them the most valuable companies in the world. Facebook, for example, pays out only about 1% of its value each year to workers (programmers) because it gets the rest of its work for free from us! In contrast, Walmart pays out 40% of its value in wages. People's role as data producers is not fairly used or properly compensated. This means that the digital economy is far behind where it should be, that the income from it is distributed to a small number of wealthy savants rather than to the masses, and that many of us have a false fear of AI creating mass unemployment when humans are more necessary than ever to our digital economy. (PAGE 209)

...virtual and augmented reality, self-driving cars, and drones that deliver goods to consumers at the click of a button. Because these services have high "sample complexity," they require vast stores of data on which to train the ML systems. Thus, the vast data sets collected by Google, Facebook, and others as a by-product if their core business functions became a crucial source of revenue and competitive advantage. Companies that started as reluctantly free service provides in search of a revenue model and morphed into advertising platforms are now in the process of becoming data collectors, delivering services that lure users into providing information on which they train AIs using ML.

Jaron Lanier describes such platforms as "siren servers." Their allure, he explains, derives from the combination of the free services they offer because of their scale and exceptional data access. Yet Lanier worries about the social and economic consequences of their business model. Because they do not pay their users for data, they do not give their users proper incentives to supply data that are most needed. 

For example, right now Facebook receives a constant flow of hundred of millions of new photos posted each day by users. These photos are good training grounds for ML systems that Facebook is developing to automatically label and even explain photos. Yet at present, there is a mismatch between Facebook's needs and the reasons that users post photos. Users often provide little information accompanying a photo because they expect their friends to understand the context of it. The result is that the data that Facebook receives are low-quality. (PAGE 220-221)

If these AI-driven companies represent the future of broader parts of the economy without something basic changing in their business model, we may be headed for a world where labor's share falls dramatically from its current roughly 70% to something closer to 20-30%...Lanier's insight, however, is that even if this does come to pass, AIs are not actually the free-standing replacement for human labor they appear to be. They are trained with and learn from human data. Thus AI, just as much as fields or factories, offers a critical role for ordinary human labor -- as suppliers of data, or what we will call *data as labor*. Failing to recognize data as labor could thus create what Lanier calls "fake unemployment," where jobs dry up not because humans are not useful but because the valuable inputs they supply are created as byproducts of enterainment rather than as socially valued work...Yet none of this will happen unless people change their attitudes toward data. (PAGE 223)

Adam Smith's classic "diamond-water" paradox. Smith found it paradoxical that water was so valuable in use and yet had little value in exchange, while diamonds have such limited uses and yet have great value in exchange. This diamond-water paradox was finally resolved by the "marginal revolution" of the late nineteenth century in which William Stanley Jevons, Leon Walras, and Carl Menger argued that the exchange value of a good is determined by the *marginal value* of the last unit of a good available, rather than the *average* value gained by its consumption. While the average value of water is high, its marginal value is low as it is so plentiful. Varian's argument is that while data may have enormous value in total or on average, *on the margin* no individual's data are worth more. (PAGE 224-225)

**The primary determinant of the marginal value is not the statistics of a given ML problem, but rather the distribution of complexity across different problems**...Early ML systems for speech recognition achieved gains in accuracy more quickly than did later systems. However, a speech recognition system with all but very high accuracy is mostly useless, as it takes so much time for the user to correct the errors it makes. This means that the last few percentage points of accuracy may make a bigger difference for the value of a system than the first 90% does. The marginal value grows to the extent that it allows this last gap to be filled. (PAGE 228)

Prior to the rise of capitalism, feudal labor arrangements worked similarly. Lords insulated their serfs from fluctuations in markets and guaranteed them safety and traditional rights to use the land and to keep enough of their crop to survive. In exchange, lords took all the upside of the market return on serfs' argricultural output. Similarly, today, siren servers provide useful and enjoyable information services, while taking the market value of the data we produce in exchange. We thus refer to this contemporary system as "technofeudalism." (PAGE 231)

Technofeudalism also stunts personal development, just as feudalism stunted the acquisition of education or investment in improving land. The inability to earn money in these environments undercuts the possibility of developing skills or careers around digital contributions, as technoserfs know any investment they make will be expropriated by the platforms. At best, by becoming an exceptionally active member of a digital community once can earn some kudos, badges, and recognition that one can hope to parlay into some vaguely related work offline. At worst, regardless of how much you contribute, you still receive the same digital services as anyone else. (PAGE 232)

Beyond the market structure and the nature of AI technology, the nature of social media makes these sites particularly resistant to competition. Most users want to be part of a social network that includes all of their friends. These *network efffects* can make it difficult for competitors to enter the market unless they have enough financial backing to subsidize users for years -- and the social norms around money not changing hands make even that strategy challenging to pull off. Many social scientists have also argued that siren servers use techniques similar to those employed by casinos to make their content addictive. Together these properties raise the power of siren servers to lock users into patterns that may not serve their long-term interests.
> Adam Alter, *Irresistible: The Rise of Addictive Technology and the Business of Keeping Us Hooked*(Penguin, 2017)

Yet even as unions have declined, some of the conditions we describe above have important resemblance to the conditions that helped stimulate their growth and benefits. The monopsony power of siren servers, we have argued, may be holding down wages for data laborers at 0 (or more precisely at the value of the services and entertainment these laborers derive from using digital services). This may suppress the productivity of the digital economy by reducing the quality and quantity of data and contribute to the maldistribution of gains from AI technologies. An individual data worker lacks bargaining power, so she cannot credibly threaten to withdraw her data from Facebook or Google unless she receives a fair reward. (PAGE 241)

## Conclusion: Going to the Root
> *Laissez faire (in its full true meaning) opens the way to the realization of the noble dreams of socialism.* - Henry George, *Progress and Poverty*, 1879

We reject the assumed tradeoff between productivity and employment underlying the debate. Market power is fundamental to our view of the economy and market power simultaneously retards productivity and depresses employment. Hoarding of property away from its most productive uses creates unemployment but also reduces economic growth. Monopsony power, whether created by sintitutional investors or by natural monopsony in data economies, induces artificial unemployment to hold down wages and devalue work. Exclusion of the workers of poor countries from the opportunities in rich ones lowers global productivity and may reduce work opportunities overall by spurring automation. Anemic employment and low productivity growth result from institutional failure rather than changes in technology. (PAGE 255)

the COST will improve the efficiency of the economy by reducing monopoly power. Because goods will move more quickly to their most valued use, economic growth will pick up. Because the prices of assets will decline, harming wealthy people at the margin and helping poorer people, inequality will decline. This more efficient method of raising revenue will make it cheaper to fund public goods that benefit people and to offer a social dividend to people whose talents are not valued by the market. Restrictions on institutional investing will also reduce the role of market power in the economy.

QV will magnify these positive effects. One of the greatest sources of inefficiency in the economy is the primitive way that public goods are selected. In the current system, revenues raised from the general public often get funneled to special interests or are recycled in the form of inefficiently designed entitlements for the majority. By "marketizing" the political system, QV will help ensure that public goods reflect the preferences of the public at large rather than subsets of it. (PAGE 256)

To understand how a COST on human capital might work, imagine that individuals were to self-assess a value of their time, pay a tax on this self-assessed value, and stand ready to work for an employer willing to pay this wage. Consider a surgeon, for example, who announced that she would perform a gullbladder surgery for $2,000. She would pay a tax based on that amount, and be required to perform an operation on anyone who offered that amount. The tax would discourage her from overvaluing her time and thus denying her talents to a needy community, while the need to be on-call at that wage would avoid her setting too low a wage. 

In principle, a COST on human capital would be immensely valuable. Indeed, it would address the single biggest threat to equality and productivity that we have not addressed -- the ability of the most talented people (the top scientists, lawyers, accountants, entertainers, financial whizzes) to withhold their services unless paid a monopoly price. (PAGE 257)

In tandem with monetized QV, QV itself could be used to reduce the influence of money on politics. Small political contributions could be matched and large ones taxed according to a rule suggested by the logic of QV: a political campaign should receive an amount proportional to the square root of the amount contributed. Such a system would reduce the influence of wealth on politics while preserving freedom of expression. (PAGE 263-264)

> *the familiar lines of economic and political debate are artifacts of poor imagination and stale assumptions. To build a better world, we must move beyond the self-defeating conflict of left and right* (PAGE 276)

## After Markets?

Hayek argued that no central planner could obtain information about people's tastes and productivity necessary to allocate resources efficiently. **The genius of the market was the way that the price system could, in disaggregated fashion, collect this information from everyone and supply it to those who needed to know it**, without the involvement of a government planning board. (PAGE 278)

Cosma...Shalizi notes in his essay, "In the Soviet Union, Optimization Problem Solves *You*," the computer power it takes to solve an economic allocation problem increases more than proportionally to the number of commodities in the economy. In practical terms, this means that in any large economy, central planning by a single computer is impossible.

> *We advocate "Radical Markets" because we believe that in the present stage of technological and economic development, where cooperation has grown too large to be managed by moral economies, the market is the appropriate computer to achieve the greatest good for the greatest number. If we see it as such, we can fix the bugs in the market's code and enable it to generate more wealth that is distributed more fairly.*

