# When you’re walking on ice, you might as well dance

I entered the University of Virginia overflowing with confidence. I had done well in high school and secured a spot in the honors college. From the beginning, I had an enormous ego and its resilience would serve me well over the next few years.

## MATH
The summer before my first year I read “Love and Math” by Edward Frenkel. There was one quote from the book that stuck with me and will motivate me to continue studying math for the rest of my life:
> “Math is a way to describe reality and figure out how the world works, a universal language that has become the gold standard of truth. In our world, increasingly driven by science and technology, mathematics is becoming, ever more, the source of power, wealth, and progress. Hence those who are fluent in this new language will be on the cutting edge of progress.”
Indeed, I noticed that innovation in every technical field lagged progress in mathematics by decades if not centuries. By developing competency in what many regard as the most difficult subject, I reinforced my belief that I could do anything. I would never mutter the dreaded sentence, “I want to learn about [technical topic], but the math is too hard.” During this time, I forged a friendship with a talented young mathematician who we’ll call Neb. Neb encouraged to push myself and called me out when my work ethic didn’t keep up with my ambition. His guidance was instrumental in making me who I am today, and I will forever appreciate the impact that he had on my life.

## FINANCIAL MARKETS
In high school, I met an eccentric kid who we’ll call Catz. Although Catz could rarely motivate himself to do homework or fill out class worksheets, he maintained inspiring intellectual curiosity. We’d shoot hoops after school for hours and talk about politics, foreign affairs, and girls. We shared an interest in current events that gradually developed into a passion for identifying trends and making predictions. By the time we started college, we were both years ahead of our peers when it came to understanding and dissecting financial markets. 

He quickly rose to the top of his school’s investment club, and, after experiencing initial rejection, I took my place in both AIF and MII at UVA (the two investment clubs at the time). In the Spring of my first year, I won the UVA Stock Pitch Competition, and it felt like I was living my best life. The next summer, I spent three weeks at the London School of Economics studying Alternative Investments before interning at a Private Equity fund in Connecticut. It was through these experiences that I developed an interest in Monetary Policy and Economics. 

## ECON && CS
The next semester I started the Federal Reserve Challenge team at the University of Virginia. The competition consisted of presenting a comprehensive overview of the US economy alongside educated monetary policy recommendations. Our team won the state competition, but came up short at regionals. The experience demystified many of the long term macro trends that are sometimes overlooked in finance.

Outside of my clubs, I continued committing myself to Math and took a few Computer Science classes. Over time, I realized that programming would be an invaluable skill so I took classes that helped me establish a foundation in OOP.  During my second year, I started to realize that conventional success in school did not correspond to the best preparation for success in the real world. By challenging myself with Math, Physics, and CS classes, I chose the road less traveled and sacrificed my GPA. When I was rejected by the commerce school in Spring 2017, my parents were the first to remind me that I could have taken easier classes to gain admittance; I’m very glad that I didn’t. Around this time, I was reading Ray Dalio’s Principles, and I remember liking this quote a lot:
> “If you're not failing, you're not pushing your limits, and if you're not pushing your limits, you're not maximizing your potential” 
With the advent of the internet and the increased accessibility of resources for learning, the opportunity cost of college gradually increased. As I established a strong foundation in Economics, Math, and Computer Science, I started to realize that the marginal benefit of going to class and doing homework was largely outweighed by the marginal opportunity cost. 

After spending the summer after my second year interning at Fitch Credit Rating agency in New York, I became convinced that most jobs in finance could be automated. I was bummed that I had to spend the Summer on belittling manual data entry when most of the work probably could have been done via a simple python script. 

But the summer wasn’t a complete waste. I also met Chris Dannen and Leo Zhang of Iterative Instinct, a hedge fund that invests in digital assets. My conversations with them helped me navigate the cryptocurrency space, and provided an informal introduction to many of blockchain’s early use cases. Leo encouraged me to consider pursuing development in the blockchain space.

## BLOCKCHAIN = Math + CS + Econ/Finance
The first semester of my 3rd year, I reached out to Professor David Evans to learn more about blockchain technology. Professor Evans guided my curriculum during the entirety of my 3rd year, and offered extremely useful advice on programming languages, frameworks, and new technology related to blockchains (MPC). During this time, my grades started to fall and I lost interest in my classes. As I learned more about blockchain technology, the opportunity cost imposed by college continued to increase. At some point, I realized that I was only staying in school to placate friends, family, and society in general. Is this a good enough reason?

The summer after my 3rd year, I stayed in Charlottesville. I worked remote as a graduate cryptography research intern for Hyperledger, the blockchain subsidiary of the Linux foundation. During my free time, I built blockchain developer courses for Blockmatics. In the three month period spanning from June to August 2018, I learned more than I have ever learned in any comparable period of my life. At the end of the summer, I was happy and felt fulfilled. Although I had neglected my old social circles, I was satisfied with my progress and excited to continue pushing myself.

## COLLEGE DROP
When I started the first semester of my 4th year, I found it hard to pull myself away from the blockchain space. While I tolerated my classes, I was not happy with how they inherently detracted from my career preparation. Cornell has 18 blockchain courses. MIT, Caltech, UC Berkeley, and Stanford all have dedicated research groups, student organizations, and specific classes for learning about blockchain technology. Meanwhile, UVA had one 1-credit class on blockchain technology in the Fall of 2018 and I was teaching it (CS1501). 

After a few weeks into the semester, I became aware of dangerous rumors that had been circulating among some of my old friends. Before I was even made aware of the accusations, I was ostracized. The social environment was toxic and, even after I tried to dispel the rumors, nobody listened. I stopped eating and sleeping. Eventually, I realized that I didn’t want to be at UVA any longer.

I’m ready for the next chapter in my life. I’m moving to Berlin and am determined to become a Rust developer for Parity Technology. Maybe one day I’ll finish my college degree, but hopefully I won’t need to. Regardless, I’m done living my life for other people. 