# Parity <3
> This document serves as an informal history of Parity and details a few of the reasons why I think the company and its projects have a bright future.

Parity's [history](#History) reveals the significant contributions that the company and its individuals have already made to the decentralization movement. The company has differentiated itself in its ability to identify mistakes and incorporate lessons learned into modes of operation moving forward. Moreover, they maintain great comunication with the blockchain ecosystem and exercise transparency in all major projects. Indeed, Parity serves as a model for new and existing organizations in the space.

The company owes much of its success to a [culture](#Culture) and philosophy of operation that supports autonomy. Parity's CTO Fredrick Harrysson has said that the company strives to embody the ideals of [Programmer's Anarchy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uk-CF7klLdA) to ensure that, as an employee, "you can dive as deep as you want into that rabbit hole and geek out about something you love doing". This approach to developer governance encourages creativity and innovation thereby fostering a very productive environment for solving complex problems.

From the beginning, Parity has made smart technical decisions to ensure their [technology](#Technology) remains relevant for the foreseeable future. By targeting WASM, coding in Rust, and using libp2p for networking, Parity has incorporated much of the best technology into its main projects. These design decisions reveal great awareness of the cutting-edge technical development both within and outside of the blockchain space. In open source software, this awareness is imperative to success as collaboration takes on newfound importance in the context of an accelerating development environment.

# History <a name = "History" ></a>
> [Zero Knowledge FM Episode 46 with Gavin Wood](https://www.zeroknowledge.fm/46)

Gavin Wood was Ethereum's CTO for the first 18-24 months of the project. In this role, he was responsible for ensuring the design, development and final release of Ethereum went well. During his time as Ethereum's CTO, Gavin Wood wrote the [Ethereum Yellow Paper](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf), which contained the specification for the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) as well as the Solidity programming language. His contributions to the Ethereum project in its early stages were instrumental in enabling the initial launch of Ethereum. 

## Parity.init()

In 2015, Gavin and a few Ethereum developers started ETHCore, which eventually became Parity. In its early days, Parity was focused on supporting Ethereum by building infrastructure to enable secure interaction with the Ethereum blockchain.


Since his formal departure from the Ethereum Foundation, Gavin Wood has remained involved in Ethereum development and has continued to build supporting infrastructure, including most notably the [Parity-Ethereum client](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-ethereum).

> mention Robert Habermeier and their experience building clients; how that has influenced the design of substrate and polkadot


## Scaling with Polkadot

Since the first day of Ethereum, sharding was on the long-term roadmap.
> consider a note here about chain fibers
> consider a note here about proof of stake
> [Vitalk Tweet Storm](https://twitter.com/VitalikButerin/status/1029900695925706753)


Around mid-2016, the Parity-Ethereum client reached version 1.0 and scaling become more of a concern. Although there were many interesting ideas being discussed at a high level, Parity's team started to become impatient/frustrated with the lack of concrete specifications from the Ethereum Research team. At some point, they realized that Parity would need to build a scalable version of Ethereum with or without the Ethereum Foundation.

Before we continue, it is worth considering the obstacles faced by the Ethereum Research team at the time. Rather than having the flexibility of implementing an entirely new system from scratch, the Ethereum Foundation research team was forced to work under the constraints of the existing Ethereum implementation. As Gavin Wood mentions in the [podcast](https://www.zeroknowledge.fm/46), "uprading any system in situ is very hard; upgrading a decentralized system in situ is basically impossible." With this in mind, Parity's team decided the best approach 

*"the next chapter hadn't been written so it was up to us to pick up the pen"*

main idea: Heterogeneous sharding

In late Summer 2016, 

Refinements in the technical specification of governance. Parachains defined in terms of WebAssembly. The main relay chain itself would also be defined in terms of WebAssembly. 

> separating human and technical governance


> transition this into culture; especially explain the mistakes of Parity

## Learning from Mistakes

### The DAO disaster
> lesson: importance of good governance

### Ethereum Hard Forks
> These were just network

> noncontroversial technical upgrades to make it better; risky and operationally heavy; people have general aversion to such things....reluctance to do anything with hard forks is resulting in a lack of innovation

> this contributed to Polkadot design choices with respect to governance

### The Parity Multisig Hack
> go through blog posts on what hey learned

> this led to more rigorous third party audit standards and a long-term partnership with Trail of Bits; audits are now the norm in the space for significant projects

# Culture <a name = "Culture" ></a>


# Technology <a name = "Technology" ></a>