# Fiat-Shamir Heuristic
> convert an interactive proof to a non-interactive proof

## High Level Explanation

The basic idea is to reduce interaction by having the verifier send the prover a hash function *H* (chosen at random from some family of hash functions). The prover then "simulates" all the verifier's messages on his own by applying *H* to the transcript so far. For example, a three-messsage interactive proof, where we denote the transcript by (*a*, *B*, *g*), is converted to the following 2-message protocol, where the verifier first sends a hash function *H* to the prover, and then the prover simulates the three messages on his own as follows: He first computes his first message *a*, then he computes the verifier's message *B* by setting *B = H(a)*, and finally he computes his final message *g*, and sends *(a, B, g)* to the verifier.

The intuition for why this method is secure, is that if H looks like a truly random function, and if all the prover can do is use *H* in a black-box manner, then interacting with *H* is similar to interacting with the real verifier, and hence security follows.

## More Formal Explanation

The Fiat-Shamir (FS) Heuristic [FS86] enables us to convert an interactive *public coin* protocol between a *prover* P and a *verifier* V into a one-message (non-interactive) protocol.

In a public-coin protocol, the verifier sends a uniformly random *challenge* to the prover in each round. Under the FS heuristic, the prover executes the original interactive protocol "in their head", computing the verifier's challenge in each round by applying some public hash function to the transcript of the protocol so far. The prover then only sends the final protocol transcript to the actual verifier, who verifies its validity. The hash function can be initialized with some randomly chosen public seed, which we think of as a "common random string (CRS)", and therefore the compiled protocol is non-interactive in the CRS model.

Alternatively, the seed can also be chosen by the verifier in an additional message, in which case the compiled protocol consists of two messages.

On the positive side, if the FS heuristic uses a *random oracle* as its hash function, then it is known to be sound when applied to *any* 3PC argument [BR93, PS00, AABN02]. On the other hand, the work of Goldwasser and Kalai [GK03] shows a surprisingly negative result: the FS heuristic *cannot* be securely instantiated with any *actual* efficient hash function that would achieve the same result. In particular, there exists *some* 3PC argument on which the FS heuristic is *never* sound, no matter which efficient hash function we try to instantiate it with.

# Resources
* [Why "Fiat-Shamir for Proofs" Lacks a Proof](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-642-36594-2_11.pdf)
* [From Obfuscation to the Security of Fiat-Shamir for Proofs](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/303.pdf)