# Knowledge and the Wealth of Nations
> *A Story of Economic Discovery* by David Warsh

Discusses developments that preceded and followed "Endogenous Technological Change" by Paul Romer (which eventually led to his reception of the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2018).

format: `<quote> (<page number>)`

## Econ 101

The problem is that the two fundamental theorems of Adam Smith lead off in quite different and ultimately contradictory diretions. The Pin Factory is about falling costs and *increasing* returns. The Invisible Hand is about rising costs and *decreasing* returns. Which is the more important principle?...In 1951, George Stigler had written, "Either the division of labor is limited by the extent of the market, and, characteristically, industries are monopolized; or industries are characteristically competitive, and the [Invisible Hand] theorem is false or of little significance." (46)

Ricardo and Malthus had discovered the **principle of diminishing returns** -- the idea that, after a certain point, each succeeding increment of effort might produce less output. The first barrel of fertilizer does a lot, but the tenth only burns the crops. The same must be true of seed or water or time spent weeding. There must be a point at which nothing more can be obtained from adding an hour to the workday, or another worker in the field, or another row of seeds, or another tool, or an extra dose of plant food. (53)

Already in *The Communish Manifesto* he [Marx] had summed up the situation more succinctly than any comparable economics text of his day: "The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature's forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalization of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground -- what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labor?" (64)

Here's the way William Stanley Jevons excitedly put it in 1871: "The nature of Wealth and Value is explained by the consideration of indefinitely small amounts of pleasure and plain, just as the theory of Statics is made to rest upon the inequality of indefinitely small amounts of energy." (69)

But it was Jevons who won the day with arguments such as this: "**The ratio of exchange between any two commodities will be the reciprocal of the ratio of the final [marginal] degrees of utility of the quantities of commodity available for consumption after the exchange is completed**." (70)

The frank recognition that the market couldn't necessarily always be depended upon to get things right was highly subversive of the received wisdom. It raised the possibility of "multiple equilibria." Instead of the single, general, dependable, best-possible equilibrium of supply and demand that the Invisible Hand was supposed to produce, a high-unemployment equilibrium was possible as well. The economy could become "stuck," far from its full-employment equilibrium. A new mechanism was identified to account for this possibility -- wage rigidity, or "sticky" wages that employes and employees were unwilling to adjust. Psychological factors became newly important -- labeled "liquidity preference" and the "propensity to consume," to be restated as the "consumption function." (100)

starting from a maxim known as Le Chatelier's principle, which at one level could be stated simply as "Squeeze a balloon and its volume will contract," it was possible to work out mathematical formulation that would apply just as well to a profit-maximizing firm trying to decide what inputs to buy as to the balloon. "**Pressure adnd volume, or for that matter absolute temperature and entropy, have to each other the same conjugate or dualistic relation that the wage rate does to labor, or the land rent does to acres of land.**"(116)

The standard textbook demonstrations of how the mere passage of the time necessary to bring a product to market created fluctuations in market prices mattered was called the **cobweb theorem**, after the look for graphical treatments of the lags involved in the interaction. The standard example came to be the cycle of interdependent corn and hog prices. Then, in 1935, the young Ronald Coarse (and R. F. Fowler) showed that the pig-breeding cycle in England lasted four years, instead of the two years that the cobweb theorem predicted. Why was that? Perhaps because farmers would seek to take account of whatever additional information was availabile -- baon imports and shifts in demand -- knowing that more accurate forecasts would mean higher profits. The argument foreshadowed the psychological assumption that came to be known as **rational expectations**. (167)

Beyond its ordinary meaning -- curving outward like the surface of a sphere -- the term "convexity" had a special significance for economics. All the analysis of perfect competition had come to be built upon the logic of convex sets, just as during the preceding century it had been built on calculus -- set theory had trumped calculus by dispensing with some of its unrealistic assumptions about the "smoothness" of the world. In return, economics got inequalities instead of equations -- statements that carved out whole sets of points instead of simply describing a line. George Dantzig's beanpole, as a rough-shaped cone, was a convex set. So were all the other high abstractions, borrowed from rocket science, which economists had found so useful. **The infinite-dimensional spreadsheet was anchored in convexity**. The separating hyperplane theorem was a standard tool of convex analysis. It could be used to establish something as grand as competitive equilibrium, or to illustrate the supposition that any difference between market prices and natural prices will soon be erased by adjustments in price and quantity. (218)

Freshwater (economists) => New Classicals, Saltwater (economists) => New Keynesians

Suppose there are `N` workers in total, with skill levels `h` ranging from `0` to `infinity`. Let there be `N(h)` workers with skill level `h`, so that `N = N(h)dh`. Suppose a worker with skill `h` devotes a fraction `u(h)` of his non-leisure time to current production, and the remaining `1 - u(h)` to human capital accumulation. Then the effective workforce in production -- the analogue to `N(t)` in equation (2) -- is the sum `N^{e} = \int_{0}^{infinity} u(h)N(h)hdh` of the skill-weighted manhours devoted to current production. Thus if output is a function of total capital `K` and effective labor `N^{e}` is `F(K, N^{e})`, the hourly wage of a worker at skill `h` is `F_{N}(K, N^{e})h` and his total earnings are `F_{N}(K, N^{e})hu(h)`. (242)

If a poor country maintained property rights, permitted markets to function, and accumulated a certain amount of human capital, it tended to converge with the industrial leaders. (The newly industrializing Asian countries provided a good example.) Countries that failed to establish certain basic institutions on the other hand, tended to lag far behind. (269)

...the cost to skiers of waiting in line would seem small compared with the fixed cost of getting on the mountain in the first place. The effect of the queues was to make riders bear the uncertainty of how many other skiers would show up. The same idea explained why lift passes cost the same throughout the season; owners didn't raise prices but the lines are longer. Lengthening queues were an alternative to flexible money prices; they automatically adjusted the *real* prices that skiers paid. (278)
> The paper "Ski-Lift Pricing, with Applications to Labor and Other Markets" (1987) cites that these *proxy* mechanisms are used partly because of the inconvenience and added costs of setting up a more dynamic pricing mechanism. Even so, **blockchain => L2 => cheap micropayments (w/ finality) => cheap, dynamic price mechanisms**...

Clubs were groups that shared something valuable exclusively among their members -- swimming pools, golf courses, ski mountains, toll roads, trades associations, and so on. Club goods depended critically on *excludability* to make them work. The exclusion mechanism could be a guard, a gate, a fence, a ticket office, a checklist maintained by a greeter at a door -- anything that served to let member in and keep nonmembers out. Club theory was a way of identifying impure public goods and disentangling the relationship between their costs and the groups that consumed them. (281)

## Overarching Trends

[wrt "Endogenous Technological Change"] The first paragraph contained a sentence that was intially more puzzling than not: "The distinguishing feature of ... technology as input is that it is neither a conventional good nor a public good; it is a nonrival, partially excludable good..." (xvi)

his [Solow's] basic innovation was to make his model of production depend on substitution. In the Domar model there had been no possibility of substituting labor for capital in production. The ratios were fixed, and steady growth occurred only under certain rigid specified conditions. Solow replaced the fixed capital/output ratio of the Harrod and Domar models with the relatively new concept of a variable production function, whose advantages were twofold. The convention permitted producers to shift back and forth, using capital when labor was too expensive and vice versa. As a result, no longer did the model present a knife-edge problem. The new mechanism also accomodated a term determined outside the model -- a parameter, a "given" -- that described the rate of technical change. (143)

Looking to a residual for evidence of unseen forces was an old and useful trick in science. In 1846 the planet Neptune was discovered thanks to a residual in the calculations of Uranus's orbit; the neutrino was only a measurement residual for many years until the existence of the subatomic particle was experimentally confirmed in the 1950s. Paul Samuelson says that Solow was like Enrico Fermi, meaning an imaginative theorist who could also get things to work. The assumption was that A of (t), the rate of technical change, must explain the rest, by enhancing general productivity. (147)

Economists were finding that they could exploit a property of the geometry known as duality, meaning that every problem stated in terms of a linear program was intimately related to a second problem called its dual. This was what Paul Samuelson had foreseen. Any economic problem could be worked from either end -- solve the pricing problem, and you could get the answer to the allocation problem, too. Hyperplanes also play a computational role in Dantzig's simplex method for linear programming, separating feasible solutions from ones that could not be achieved. (162)

What Allyn Young had so boldly told his listeners in 1928 was that Adam Smith had missed the point. By concentrating single-mindedly on what went on *inside* the walls of the Pin Factory, he had overlooked the essential matter of the pin industry's relationship with its neighbors. The subdivision and repition of complex tasks was only part of the story of the division of labor -- the less important part at that. The invention of *new* tools and machinery and *new* materials and designs involved the division of labor as well. Often this transformation was described simply as "progress". (220)

Increasing returns were an open invitation to government internvention. In this case, if the ostensibly sovereign consumer could be locked into an inferior keyboard design by the exertions of a powerful first mover, then the Invisible Hand outcome in keyboards or, perhaps, for other things as well...That was the moral of what Krugman will soon be calling QWERTY-nomics. (234)

So Romer resorted to a time-honored trick. In hopes of showing that new knowledge was driving the system in some places faster than in others, he equated growth of knowledge with the rate of capital investment. After all, most new machines represented significant advances over old ones. Maybe technical progress was "built-in" to new capital investment, and could be discerned if capital could be assigned a "vintage." This was the **"embodiment" hypothesis**...(264)

## What is Economics and what does studying it entail?

Managing the tension between these ends -- furthering the growth of knowledge while ensuring that its benefits are widely shared -- is a responsibility of government every bit as important as monetary and fiscal policy. If the intricate system of incentives to create new ideas is underdeveloped, society suffers from the general lack of progress (most of all, the poor). (xvii)

...the power of mathematical methods. They state problems more clearly and solve them with greater clarity and persuasive power than any other method, he asserts -- including field trips to factories, or sifting through great quantities of data. He describes the process. **The evidence of the senses is where the theorist must begin, moving then to verbal description, to theorizing, and up to formal math in a steadily ascending arc of ever greater generality -- and then back down again from high abstraction to verbal formulation and the evidence of the real world.** This last setp checks the math, he says. (22)

What we look for in an explanation, said [Adam] Smith, is "a connecting principle" between apparently unrelated events. Science is a search for the "invisible chains which bind together all these discordant objects" with the precision of a physical mechanism, because "systems in many respects resemble machines." The trick of achieving an explanation, therefore, is to create a mental model, an "imaginary machine" of ever greater power and suitability, until all the causes and effects in question are worked out and mystery is dispelled. "Who wonders at the machinery of the opera house who has once been admitted behind the scenes?" (33)

Here is the first glimpse of what it since has come to mean to "think like an economist": **to see the world as a vast system of interdependent and essentially self-regulating markets in which prices constitute an automatic feedback mechanism coordinating the allocation of resources -- land, labor, and capital -- among competing uses.** (42)

At a certain point, Ricardo wrote to his friend, "**Political economy you think is an enquiry into the nature and causes of wealth -- I think it should be called an enquiry into the laws which determine the division of the produce of industry among the classes who concur in its formation. No law can be laid down respecting the quantity, but a tolerably correct one can be laid down respecting proportions.** Every day I am more satisfied the former enquiry is vain and delusive, and the latter is the only true object of the science." (56)

But for a few dacades there had been 'an extended period in which improved technique actually led to some loss of knowledge'. Something of the sort happened occasionally in economics, according to Krugman. "Economics understandably and inevitably follows the line of least mathematical resistance," he observed. "**Because universal diminishing returns were both intuitively appealing and easy to express mathematically, economists concentrated on their implications. They ignored countervailing forces that were far less easy to describe.**" (59-60)

"I loved the *Foundations*," Lucas recalled many years later. "Like so many others in my cohort, I internalized its view that if I couldn't formulate a problem in economic theory mathematically, I didn't know what I was doing. I came to the position that mathematical analysis is not one of many ways of doing economic theory. It is the only way. Economic theory *is* mathematical analysis. Everything else is just pictures and talk." (168)

Romer ~ The first interaction I can remember is playing with some control theory model and coming to the first recognition that there was a way to get at growth if I built in some increasing returns. The next thing I remember is one of these episodes, pencil and yellow pad. When you do that, there are all these ups and downs in the process, sometimes you think you've really got it, other times you think you're at a dead end. I remember trying to go to bed one night at a point where I had some success, because it's hard to relax when you think it's all falling apart...The moment (that) you look for is when you reach a kind of completion. You don't want to interrupt when things are progressing, when you've tied off a piece. I remembered somebody's description of the life of a poet: you are only a poet at the moment you finish the last line in the poem. Before then, you are a failed poet; after that, you are an ex-poet. At those moments of completion, I felt like an economist. (201)

The hard sciences excel at dealing with complex systems, says Solow, because they can isolate, they can experiment, and they can make repeated observations under controlled conditions wherein the forces being studied are not swamped by the noise. The hard sciences are good for topics like the hydrogen atom or the optic nerve. But most topics in economics are far more complex than these. The interplay between social institutions and behavior is crucial. (230)

We would like to think that the light bulb goes on, all at once, in colorful locations -- shouting Eureka! in the bathtub, the apple falling from the tree upon the head beneath. In fact, the discovery of the piece of the puzzle of economic growth that clarified the rest had its beginnings in a lunchroom conversation between Romer and Barro and others in the economics department at the University of Rochester. (276) 

## Random Interesting Stuff

One of the things that set Adam Smith apart from all other writers on economics was his formidable power of concentration. As a result, stories about his absentmindedness abound. How he walked out for air in his nightshirt and didn't stop for fifteen miles. How he thrust a slice of bread and butter into a teapot, poured in, waited, poured out -- and complained of the quality of the tea. His friend Alexander Carlyle said, "He was the most absent man in Company that I ever saw, moving his lips and talking to himself and Smiling, in the midst of large Company's. If you awakened him from his Reverie, and made him attend the Subject of Conversation, he immediately began a Harangue and never stopped till you he told you all he knew about it, with the utmost Philosophical Ingenuity." Presumably all the while he was silent since he was thinking, thinking, tracing through long chains of causation. (29)

The possibilities of marginalism were given their fullest statement by the French economist Walras -- "the Ricardo of the calculus era," as he had been called. He was born in 1834 and prepared extensively for the Ecole Polytechnique, reading Descartes, Newton, Lagrange, and Cournot. Twice he failed to gain admittance to France's top school, but he slept with a copy of Louis Poinsot's *Elements de statique* by his bed for decades, and, after a galvanizing walk one day in 1858 with his father (himself an amateur economist), Walras resolved to do for economics what engineers already had done for various intricate physical systems -- that is, construct a model fo economic general equilibrium from among the relevant interdependent variables. (70)

It turned out N. Bourbaki was no person at all, but rather a group of French mathematicians who wrote elaborate graduate texts and ascribed their authorship to a mythical retired army general. Their enthusiasm inspired a craze for formalism among mathematicians that in the 1950s and 1960s spread even to American grade schools in the form of "the new math" -- set theory for kindergartners. (135)

## ReadingQ (Referenced)

* *The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior* (1944)
* *Theory of Value: An Axiomatic Analysis of Economic Equilibrium*
* *Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy* (1985)
* *The Theory of Industrial Organization*
* The "Big Push" paper (1989)
* *An Economic Theory of Clubs* (1965)
* [The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure](https://courses.cit.cornell.edu/econ335/out/samuelson_pure.pdf)