# Ludwig Von Mises

## The Theory of Money and Credit

### Money as Price-Index

The subject of an act of valuation may quite well be a group of persona, a State or society or family, as long as it acts in this particular case as a unit, through a representative. An the object thus valued may be collections of distinct units of commodities so long as they have to be dealt with in this particular case as a whole. **There is nothing to prevent either subject or object from being a single unit for the purposes of one valuation even though in another their component parts may be entirely independent of each other.** Modern value theory is based on the fact that it is not the abstract importance of different kinds of needs that determines the scales of values but the intensity of specific desires. Starting from this, the law of marginal utility was developed in a form that referred primarily to the usual sort of case in which the collections of commodities are divisible. But there are also cases in which the total supply must be valued as it stands. (pg 46)

When a stock is valued as a whole, its marginal utility, that is to say, the utility of the last available unit of it, coincides with its total utility, since the total supply is one indivisible quantity. This is also true of the total value of free goods, whose separate units are always valueless, i.e. are always relegated to a sort of limbo at the very end of the value-scale, promiscuously intermingled with the units of all the other free goods. (pg 47)

What has been said should have made sufficiently plain the unscientific nature of the practice of attributing to money the function of acting as a measure of price or even of value. Subjective value is not measured, but graded. The problem of the measurement of objective use-value is not an economic problem at all.  (pg 47)

It would be absolutely impossible for the individual, even if he were a complete expert in commercial matters, to follow every change of market conditions and make the corresponding alterations in their scale of use- and exchange-values, unless he chose some common denominator to which he could reduce each exchange-ratio. Because the market enables any commodity to be turned into money and money into any commodity, objective exchange value is expressed in terms of money...**Money has thus become an aid that the human mind is no longer able to dispense with in making economic calculations.** (pg 49)

### Commodity, Credit and Fiat Money

We may give the name of *commodity money* to that sort of money that is at the same time a commercial commodity; and that of *fiat money* to money that comprises things with a special legal qualification. A third category may be called *credit money*, this being that sort of money which constitutes a claim against any physical or legal person. But these claims must not be both payable on demand and absolutely secure; if they were, there could be no difference between their value and that of the sum of money to which they referred, and they could not be subjected to an independent process of valuation on the part of those who dealt with them. In some way or another the maturity of these claims must be postponed to some future time. It can hardly be contested that fiat money in the strict sense of the word is theoretically conceivable. The theory of value proves the possibility of its existence. Whether fiat money has ever actually existed, is, of course, another question, and one that cannot off-hand be answered affirmatively. It can hardly be doubted that most of those kinds of money that are not commodity money must be classified as credit money. But only detailed historical investigation could clear that matter up. (pg 61)

**nominalistic monetary theories of the present day are characterized by their inability to contribute a single word towards the solution of the chief problem of monetary theory -- one might in fact simply call it the problem of monetary theory -- namely, that of explaining the exchange-ratios between money and other economic goods.** For their authors, the economic problem of value and prices simply do not exist. They have never thought it necessary to consider how market ratios are established or what they signify. (pg 63)

Fiscal considerations have led to the promulgation of a theory that attributes to the minting authority the right to regulate the purchasing power of coinage as it thinks fit. For just as long as purchasing power of the coinage has been a government function, governments have tried to fix the weight and content of the coins as they wished. Philip VI of France expressly claimed the right 'to mint such money and give it such currency and at such rate we desire and seems good to us,' and all medieval rules thought and did as he in the matter. Obliging jurists supported them by attempts to discover a philosophical basis for the divine rights of kings to debase the coinage and to prove that the true value of the coins was that assigned to them by the rules of the country. (pg 64)

## Issue of Credit
*starts on page 264*

**A credit transaction is an exchange of present goods for future goods**. 

Credit transactions fall into two groups...On the one one hand are those credit transactions which are characterized by the fact that they impose a sacrifice on that party who performs their part of the bargain before the other does -- the foregoing of immediate power of disposal over the exchanged good, or, if this version is preferred, the foregoing of power of disposal over the surrendered good until the receipt of that for which it is exchanged. This sacrifice is balanced by a corresponding gain on the part of the other party of the contract -- the advantage of obtaining the earlier disposal over the good acquired in exchange, or, what is the same thing, of not having to fulfill his part of the bargain immediately...**The exchange ratio embodied in the contract contains an expression of the value of time in the opinions of the individuals concerned.**...The second group of credit transactions is characterized by the fact that in them the gain of the party who receives before he pays is balanced by no sacrifice on the part of the other party. Thus the difference in time between fulfillment and counter-fulfillment, which is just as much the essence of this kind of transaction as of the other, has an influence merely on the valuations of the one party, while the other is able to treat it as insignificant. **If a creditor is able to confer a loan by issuing claims which are payable on demand, then the granting of the credit is bound up with economic sacrifice for them**

> This motivates some thinking. I have been approved for a grant for the past two weeks but will not be compensated for this lack of liquidity. The delay in transaction ignores the time value of liquid funds and it takes advantage of common ignorance to become a norm that hurts the recipient in all cases.

**The objective exchange-value of an indubitably secure and mature claim, which embodies a right to receive a definite individual thing or a definite quantity of fungible things, does not differ in the least from the objective exchange-value of the thing or quantity of things to which the claim refers. What is significant for us lies in the fact that such claims to money, if there is no doubt whatever concerning either their security or their liquidity, are, simply on account of their equality in objective exchange-value to the sums of money to which they refer, commercially competent to take the place of money entirely.** Anyone who wishes to acquire bread can achieve their aim by obtaining in the first place a mature and secure claim to bread.

The obligee can expect that these claims will remain in circulation for so long as their holders do not lose confidence in their their prompt convertibility or transfer them to persons who have not this confidence. They are therefore in a position to undertake greater obligations than they would ever be able to fulfill; it is enough if they takes sufficient precautions to ensure their ability to satisfy promptly that proportion of the claims that is actually enforced against them.