# Order without Design (How Markets Shape Cities)
> by Alain Bertraud

**NOTE TO SELF**: remote work will effect the dynamics described in this book

The job of an urban planner is in many ways like that of a family doctor who tries to heal the illnesses of patients and advise them on how to maintain a healthy life in the future. Nobody would trust a doctor who has only one patient...To acquire the necessary urban knowledge, an urban planner must live a nomadic life for an extended time.

This book is about the observed interaction between economic markets and design in the development of a few cities around the world...Markets are impersonal, transactional mechanisms resulting from human action but not from human design...The order created by markets manifests itself in the shape of cities. Markets transmit through prices the information generating the spatial order. When prices are distorted, so is the order generated by markets.

Auditing urban regulations is like periodically pruning a tree: the objective is not to cut branches but to allow the tree to develop fully.

Planners and engineers like to reason in terms of "needs", while urban economists think in terms of scarce resource allocation.

While most cities offer a lot more than job opportunities, it is important to recognize that the expansion of job markets makes everything else possible. A well-functioning labor market brings together people with varied by complementary knowledge and skills -- the preconditions for innovation.

Economists have convincingly demonstrated the productivity advantage of larger cities over smaller ones. Large cities generate economies of scale that allows enterprises to reduce their cost by increasing output, thereby reducing costs per unit. Economies of scale are only possible in cities with a large labor market. When many related activities are located in close proximity, they generate what economists call "knowledge spillovers". (page 21; the 2009 World Bank Development Report "Reshaping Economic Geography" and the report of the Commission on Growth and Development "Urbanization and Growth" exhaustively summarize and document the theoretical and empirical arguments justifying the economic advantage provided by the spatial concentration of economic activities in larger cities)

In spite of the prospect of higher productivity, only some types of firms can benefit from moving to a larger city. Firms established in larger cities require greater capital and higher operation and maintenance costs than those located in smaller cities. Land and rents are more expensive in larger cities than in smaller ones. Distances traveled are longer, and the "congestion tax" is higher. In addition, not every enterprise can benefit from economies of scale or agglomeration economies.

The rate of a city's population growth cannot be attributed to advance planning. Instead it is due to a combination of exogenous and endogenous circumstances. To the chagrin of urban planners, a city's growth rate over the mid or long term is largely unpredictable, and it is futile to pretend it is the result of careful planning.

In countries and regions, a natural equilibrium is reached between the size of the population and the firms choosing to settle in small, medium and large cities. This equilibrium is created by the accumulated decisions of firms and households to "vote with their feet", thereby selecting to move to the cities that will grow and to leave the cities or villages that have less potential. The spontaneous spatial equilibrium created by the sum of uncoordinated, individual decisions illustrate the principle of *Order without Design*

**Quantities of Private Goods are Determined by Markets, While Quantities of Public Goods Depend on Design**

### Decadal City Master Plans

About once every 10 years, many cities prepare a new master plan to guide future development. The master plan preparation usually follows the availability of new decadal census results. Typically, a master plan consists of three components:
* a review of past development trends and an identification of current issues
* a declaration of development objectives and priorities
* a proposal for future development (including a land use map of areas to be developed, a proposal for new zoning regulations, and a list of public investments in civil work and social infrastructure consistent with the implementation of the plan's objectives

In democratically elected municipalities, public hearings and public participation are expected during the various phases of preparation and before final approval by the municipal government...The traditional master plan exercise seems to be a fossil left over from the time when the planning practices of command economies fascinated the world. It would make more sense for cities to monitor data and indicators in real time and to adjust policy and investments according to what works and what does not, rather than waiting 10 years to assess results and eventually changing direction. (pg 131)

Some cities like Singapore and Hong Kong, have adopted a real-time monitoring adjustment approach for managing their development. Their management system has become more similar to that of corporations, which have to adopt rapidly to external shocks. (pg 131)

**Hanoi Master Plan Case Study (pg 131)**

## Rules/Trends

Land prices decreased as one got further away from city centers. When land prices were high, households and firms consumed less land and as a consequence, population density increased. While the objective of urban planning regulations was nearly always to limit densities, I noticed that they had very little success in doing so when the price of land was high compared to household income.

Better land use and transport improve the way that labor markets function, allowing for the core indispensable values of urban life:
* a commute short enough that one has time for leisure activities
* an open job market that allows one to change jobs and -- through trial and error -- find a job that best suits
* a residence from which access to social life or nature is quick and easy

**The Proportion of Smaller Cities to Large Ones Stay Constant over Time: On Average, All Grow at about the Same rate** (page 21, I may disagree with this but it is a generalization so it's easy to attack anyway)

To increase productivity, a city must have certain preconditions:
1. Firms and households must have the freedom to stay put or migrate at will
2. Travel within the city remains fast and cheap
3. Real estate is sufficiently affordable such that it does not distort the allocation of labor

**A City's Productivity Depends on its Ability to Maintain Mobility as Its Built-Up Area Grows**

### Transportation

In their 2009 book, aptly titled *Mobility First*, Sam Staley and Adrian Moore describe in detail the cross-disciplinary reforms in road and urban transport design and in road pricing, among other things, that would be required to maintain mobility in cities in the twenty first century.

Failure to manage urban transportation in a manner that maintains mobility results in congestion. Congestion decreases labor mobility and productivity and is in fact avoidable in large cities. Its presence represents a failure on the part of city managers. Congestion has a dual negative effect: it acts as a tax on productivity by tying down people and goods, and it degrades the environment and increases greenhouse gas emissions..the economic advantage of spatial concentration can be offset by congestion

**Commuting Time and Commuting Cost Limit the Size of Labor Markets**
Because the time spent commuting is a dead loss for both individuals and employers, the size and efficiency of a labor market depends on how short, cheap, and comfortable the commute is. The maximum cost in time and cash that workers are willing to spend commuting will there dictate the size of the labor market and, by extension, the productivity of a city.

**The Effective Size of the Labor Market Depends on Travel Time and the Spatial Distribution of Jobs** (pg 35)

### Infrastructure

Governments have to use the power of eminent domain to purchase land for road alignment to link together local, privately built road segments. While the government may well compensate landowners for their land at an equivalent market price, the acquisition of the land under eminent domain is not a market operation. There is only one buyer: the government, and the seller of the land has no choice but to sell, regardless of whether she is willing to do so. (pg 62)

Increasingly, governments are using contracts with private firms to build major discrete lengths of road or rail infrastructure. These build-operate-transfer (BOT) or build-operate-own-transfer (BOOT) contracts, however, do not in any way remove the primary responsibility from the government for initiating the design, deciding on the specifications, and imposing the contractual agreement. In BOT or BOOT arrangements, the government is always the initiator. Therefore, regardless of a BOT contract, the outcome is the same: A major road is always the product of government design, not of market mechanisms, even when a private contractor builds it, maintains it, and collects toll from its users. (pg 62)

**Urban Road Networks Made of Privately Developed Access Roads Results in Poor Metropolitan Road Networks** (pg 63)
So far, cities have yet to find a way to entirely rely on the private sector to design, finance, and operate a metropolitan network of roads without any government intervention.

### Spatial Distribution of Land Prices and Densities (ch 4)

The simplest version of the standard urban model is based on the following assumptions (pg 96):
1. The city is located in a featureless plain where agricultural land has a uniform rent
2. All jobs are concentrated in a central business district (CBD)
3. People commute to work following an infinite number of straight radial roads

The model aims to predict the variations in land price and density (ie land consumption) when land users compete with one another and when their transport costs are proportional to the distance between their residence and the city center.

#### Land Development Cost and the Limit of Urbanization

In many cities, land subdivision regulations are setting minimum standards that developers have to meet to transform agricultural land into developable urban lots (pg 123). Complying with these regulations imposes four types of costs:
1. civil work costs for roads, sidewalks, and infrastructure
2. land costs, as some of the land bought from farmers has to be set aside for roads, social facilities, and open space
3. overhead costs that include design, supervision, and "paper publishing" to obtain the various permits from different departments
4. financial costs represented by interest during construction (interest has to be paid on the amount disbursed between the time land is acquired and the time when the plots are ready to be sold to builders)

Informal developments are likely to develop at the fringe of urbanization in cities where the costs of land development are higher than what a portion of the population can afford (or is willing to pay). When a large part of the urban population cannot afford the cost of the minimum standards imposed by regulation, the enforcement of the planning rules becomes impossible...In Mumbai, informal settlements represented more than 55 percent of the housing stock in 2010. **The growth of informality is not necessarily driven by poverty but by the arbitrariness and high cost of land use regulations.** (pg 128)

**Informal development is a market response to the design rigidity imposed by regulations.**

A 2008 paper estimates that about 114,000 units of illegal new dwellings were built in New York City between 1990 and 2000. These new units were created by subdividing and expanding legally acquired houses built in existing developments...**The growth of informal sectors in developed and developing countries has the same cause: poorly conceived land use regulations that do not take into account the income of poor households.** (pg 128)